Enum Type Inference (#230)
dlang/DIPs: DIPs/1NNN-AP.md

- [Swift](https://docs.swift.org/swift-book/LanguageGuide/Enumerations.html)
- [Ziglang](https://ziglang.org/documentation/master/#Enum-Literals)
- [Odin](https://odin-lang.org/docs/overview/#implicit-selector-expression)

Java allows omitting an enum type in switch-case statements: [https://docs.oracle.com/javase/tutorial/java/javaOO/enum.html](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/tutorial/java/javaOO/enum.html)

A suggestion for a similar feature in Rust, but with a different approach: [https://internals.rust-lang.org/t/enum-path-inference-with-variant-syntax/16851](https://internals.rust-lang.org/t/enum-path-inference-with-variant-syntax/16851)

## Description
Due to `.enumMember` being the same syntax as the [module scope operator](https://dlang.org/spec/module.html#module_scope_operators),
I propose that ETI should use the syntax `$enumMember`. I'm open to discussing alternatives,
but I believe that my proposed syntax represents the best compromise between convenience and compatibility.

#### 1. Assignment statements.
Assigning to a variable with a known type should allow ETI.
```d
enum A{ a,b,c,d; }

struct B{ A one, two; }

void main(){

>     A    myA1 = $b; //myA1 = A.b

Reviewer: Should compound expressions work? E.g. `A x = $a | $b;`. Ditto for `return $a | $b;`.

Author: > Should compound expressions work? E.g. `A x = $a | $b;`. Ditto for `return $a | $b;`.

I think I'm unfamiliar with this syntax, what does bitwise ORing two enum members result in?

Reviewer 2: The same thing as if you were bitwise ORing their base type.

Reviewer: Thanks. Just to point out, enum ORing is typically used with non-overlapping enum values such as a=1, b=2, c=4, d=8, e=16 etc to pass multiple flags as a function argument. So a | c would be 5. Then the parameter received can be ANDed with c to see if c is set.

Author: > Thanks. Just to point out, enum ORing is typically used with non-overlapping enum values such as a=1, b=2, c=4, d=8, e=16 etc to pass multiple flags as a function argument. So a | c would be 5. Then the parameter received can be ANDed with c to see if c is set.

Saying that, I think a syntax like this would be very useful for C API wrappers. would Do you know if it would be feasible to make this work without breaking changes?
```d
enum Flags{ a=1,b=2,c=4,d=8 }
void setFlags(int flags);
int flagVar;

void main(){
    setFlags(Flags.a | $b | $d);
    flagVar = Flags.d + $a + $a;
    flagVar = Flags.b & $c;
}
```
I'm picturing it having the same rules as the array literal syntax. (first—or maybe closest to the left?—enum type used for ETI, can be interchanged with integers, maybe floats)

    auto myA2 = $b; //error, we don't know the type of "$b"!
    
    B myB;
    myB.one = $c; //myB.one = A.c
    myB.two = $d; //myB.two = A.d
}
```

#### 2. Return statements.
If a function has an explicit enum return type, its return statement(s)
should allow ETI.
```d
enum A{ a,b,c,d; }

A myFunc(){
    return $c; //returns A.c
}

auto myBrokenFunc(){
    return $c; //error, we don't know the type of "$c"!
}
```

#### 3. Parameters.
Most parameters require explicit typing beforehand, and thus should

> always allow ETI. The exception is `alias` template parameters, which

Author: This change does not reflect the intended meaning of this sentence, which is referring to `alias` template parameters: `template(alias param);`
Template type parameters cannot be inferred from ETI enum members, as they do not contain a type. I showed this in the example below the suggested change. I didn't think it was worth mentioning specifically since I felt it was a given, whereas alias parameters could *theoretically* work with ETI if it allowed for incredibly ambiguous syntax.
Thanks for the suggestion though. :)

> always allow ETI. The exception is `alias` template parameters, which

Reviewer: The wording is *the exception*. So the example is surprising to the reader as they read that alias parameters are the only exception. BTW alias parameters can be typed `alias Foo foo`. There are also sequence parameters `seq...` which can take values of any type.

> always allow ETI. The exception is `alias` template parameters, which

Reviewer: ```suggestion
always allow ETI. The exception is template parameters of unspecified type, which
```

> always allow ETI. The exception is `alias` template parameters, which

Author: > The wording is _the exception_. So the example is surprising to the reader as they read that alias parameters are the only exception. BTW alias parameters can be typed `alias Foo foo`. There are also sequence parameters `seq...` which can take values of any type.

Okay, I think I'll just reword that bit entirely.

cannot use ETI.
```d
enum A{ a,b,c,d; }

struct B{ A one, two; }

void myFunc(A param){}
void myTempFunc(T)(T param){}

void main(){
    B    myB1 = {one:$a, two:$b};
    auto myB2 = B($a, $b);
    
    myFunc($a);
    myTempFunc!A($a);
    myTempFunc($a); //error, can't infer a type to instantiate template with from "$a"
}
```

#### 4. Switch-case statements.
Switch-case statements should have a special syntax that works the same way as `switch(myVar) with(typeof(myVar))`.
```d
enum WordLetterOfTheDay{ a,b,c,d/*...*/; }

void main(){
    auto letterToday = WordLetterOfTheDay.b;
    
    import std.stdio;
    switch(letterToday){

>         case a:

Author: By "already in scope", do you mean `switch(letterToday) with(WordLetterOfTheDay){`?
If so, I believe that this syntax should be ignored for enum types. Part of my goal with this DIP is that it should not introduce any breaking changes.

>         case a:

Reviewer: Say you have `int a;` or `WordLetterOfTheDay b;` declared before the switch. Those could conflict with the enum member names.

>         case a:

Reviewer: Currently the dip implies those declarations would be ignored, but that could potentially break existing code.

>         case a:

Author: > Say you have `int a;` or `WordLetterOfTheDay b;` declared before the switch. Those could conflict with the enum member names.

Currently this exact case would cause an error (as of dmd 2.100.0):
```d
enum A{ a,b,c,d }
int a=0;

void main(){
	A myA = A.a;
	switch(myA){
		case a:
			break;
		default:
	}
}
```
```
source/app.d(9,8): Error: cannot implicitly convert expression `a` of type `int` to `A`
```
I suppose this DIP could potentially cause broken old code to compile if it was written this way, but that's not a breaking change.

Here's an actual breaking change that I didn't realise could be caused by this:
```d
enum A{ a,b,c,d }
alias a=A.b;

void main(){
	A f = A.a;
	switch(f){
		case a: //is this A.a or A.b??
			break;
		default:
	}
}
```
What if I revise the DIP so that switch-case statements with enums require the `$enumMember` syntax, but also introduce a shorthand for `switch(myVar) with(typeof(myVar))`: `switch with(myVar)`

This would be useful for more than just enums, of course. My main concern is that I may have overlooked an issue with using `with` in this way, as I've never actually used it myself.

Another option is to prioritise non-enum members here unless there's a `$` prefix, but I feel that this would be obtuse and cause very hard-to-diagnose bugs.

I'll revise the DIP in the next few days with this issue in mind, thank you for bringing it to my attention.

>         case a:

Reviewer: > so that switch-case statements with enums require the $enumMember syntax, 

Yes that's the most consistent and avoids ambiguity.

> but also introduce a shorthand for switch(myVar) with(typeof(myVar)): switch with(myVar)

That would avoid breaking code, though I think having to write `$member` for each case is trivial and improves readability in a long switch statement.

>         case a:

Author: > That would avoid breaking code, though I think having to write `$member` for each case is trivial and improves readability in a long switch statement.

True. It's still more effort per case than with the old `switch(myVar) with(typeof(myVar))`, which presents a strange old-school/new-school way of writing short enum switch-cases. I'll have to sleep on it, but I think the `switch with` syntax could be really useful too, unless I'm missing something bad. :thinking:

            writeln("Apple");
            break;
        case b:
            writeln("Bicycle");
            break;
        case c:
            writeln("Caterpillar");
            break;
        case d:
            writeln("Didgeridoo");
            break;
        /*...*/
    }
}
```

#### 5. Array literals.
When an array literal has a specified type, ETI should always be allowed(1).

When an array literal has an ambiguous type, I propose that if an enum type is explicitly
used for the first array item, ETI should be allowed in the remainder of the array.
```d
enum A{ a,b,c,d; }

A[4] x = [$a, $b, $c, $d];  //(1)

> auto y = [A.a, $b, $c, $d]; //(2)

Reviewer: If the literal has a different inferred common type, does this rule still apply? E.g. `[A.a, 7, $b]`.

Author: > If the literal would have a different inferred common type, does this rule still apply? E.g. `[A.a, 7, $b]`.

Apparently that would turn the whole array into an array of ints? That's some weird cast behaviour, but I don't see why it would affect this rule (e.g. by creating ambiguity or breaking old syntax).

Author: To clarify, I think that `auto y = [A.a, 7, $b];` would turn into `[0, 7, 1]`.

```

#### Other considerations
Any time where there is more than one valid candidate for the type of a member, ETI should not be allowed.
```d
enum A{ a,b,c,d; }

> enum B{ a,b,c,d; }

Author: I find that the wording already specifies that using a specific member (not an entire enum type) is disallowed if there's two possible types it could belong to. If you can think of a clearer phrasing, please let me know.

> enum B{ a,b,c,d; }

Reviewer: The wording is ok, but it would be clearer if the example showed that unique members can still be used.

> enum B{ a,b,c,d; }

Author: > The wording is ok, but it would be clearer if the example showed that unique members can still be used.

Thank you, I've updated the example accordingly.

## Description
Due to `.enumMember` being the same syntax as the [module scope operator](https://dlang.org/spec/module.html#module_scope_operators),
I propose that ETI should use the syntax `$enumMember`. I'm open to discussing alternatives,
but I believe that my proposed syntax represents the best compromise between convenience and compatibility.

#### 1. Assignment statements.
Assigning to a variable with a known type should allow ETI.
```d
enum A{ a,b,c,d; }

struct B{ A one, two; }

void main(){
    A    myA1 = $b;      //myA1 = A.b
    A    myA2 = $b | $c; //myA2 = A.c
    auto myA3 = $b;      //error, we don't know the type of "$b"!
    
    B myB;
    myB.one = $c; //myB.one = A.c
    myB.two = $d; //myB.two = A.d
}
```

#### 2. Return statements.
If a function has an explicit enum return type, its return statement(s)
should allow ETI.
```d
enum A{ a,b,c,d; }

A myFunc(){
    return $c; //returns A.c
}

auto myBrokenFunc(){
    return $c; //error, we don't know the type of "$c"!
}
```

#### 3. Parameters.

> Any explicitly typed enum parameters should allow ETI.

Reviewer: Just to mention, this could include default arguments to avoid repeating the enum type:
```d
void f(A e = $b);
```

Author: Good suggestion! ;)

    S    myS1 = {one:$a, two:$b};
    auto myS2 = S($a, $b);

    myFn($a);
    myFn($a + $a); // passes A.b

    myDefaultFn();
    myDefaultFn($c);

    myTempFn!A($a);
    myTempFn($a); // error, can't infer a type to instantiate the template with from "$a"
}
```

### 4. Case statements
ETI is allowed in the case statements of a switch.
```d
import std.stdio: writeln;

enum WordLetterOfTheDay{ a,b,c,d/*...*/ }

void main(){
    auto letterToday = WordLetterOfTheDay.b;
    
    import std.stdio;
    switch(letterToday){
        case $a:
            writeln("Apple");
            break;
        case $b:
            writeln("Bicycle");
            break;
        case $c:
            writeln("Caterpillar");
            break;
        case $d:
            writeln("Didgeridoo");
            break;
        /*...*/
    }
}
```

### 5. Array literals
A) ETI is allowed in array literals in initializations and assignments as determined by item 1 (Initializations and assignments) above.

B) ETI is also allowed in array literals for which an explicit enum type can be inferred.
```d
enum A{ a,b,c,d }

// (A)
A[4] x = [$a, $b, $c, $d];
// (B)
auto y = [A.a, $b, $c, $d]; // typeof(y) = A[]

> auto z = [A.c, 64, $b, $b]; // typeof(z) = int[]

Reviewer 3: That B part opens up a bigger can of worms than you might think. What happens here?

```d
enum A{ a,b,c,d }
enum B{ d,c,b,a }

enum C{ e,f,g,h }
enum D:C{ i=C.f, j=C.g }

// int[] or ambiquous?
auto a = [A.c, 64, $b];
// int[][] or ambiquous?
auto b = [[A.a, A.b, $c], [B.a B.b, $c]];
// C[] or member h not found?
auto c = [D.i, $h];
// C[] or member j not found?
auto d = [C.e, $j];
```

Author: > ```d
> enum A{ a,b,c,d }
> enum B{ d,c,b,a }
> // int[] or ambiquous?
> auto a = [A.c, 64, $b];
> // int[][] or ambiquous?
> auto b = [[A.a, A.b, $c], [B.a B.b, $c]];

Ambiguity may well be heavily defined by the implementation of ETI, which is not my area unfortunately.
You can already run this code if you remove the ETI:
```d
void main(){
    auto a = [A.c, 64, A.b];
    auto b = [[A.a, A.b, A.c], [B.a, B.b, B.c]];
}
```
`a` is an int[] and `b`'s initialiser causes a compile error:
> Error: incompatible types for `([a, b, c]) : ([a, b, c])`: `A[]` and `B[]`

Would ETI's implementation turn this into an `int[][]`? I have no clue.

> ```d
> enum C{ e,f,g,h }
> enum D:C{ i=C.f, j=C.g }
> // C[] or member h not found?
> auto c = [D.i, $h];
> // C[] or member j not found?
> auto d = [C.e, $j];
> ```
I cannot see how `c` or `d`'s initialiser there could possibly compile to `C[]` **or** `D[]`, you can't use two different enum types in the same dynamic array.

Reviewer 3: For case a, you missed the point. `a` has to be `int[]`, because the literal contains `64`. The point is, $b could be inferred as either being unambiguously `A.b`, or being ambiguous between `A.b` and `B.b`, since `B` also implicitly converts to `int`.

For case b you are correct. Arrays do not convert to their parent types even if their elements do.

> cannot see how c or d's initialiser there could possibly compile to C[] or D[], you can't use two different enum types in the same dynamic array.

Because D has a base type of C. This compiles:
```D
enum C{ e,f,g,h }
enum D:C{ i=C.f, j=C.g }
auto c = [D.i, C.h];
auto d = [C.e, D.j];
```

Author: > For case a, you missed the point. `a` has to be `int[]`, because the literal contains `64`. The point is, $b could be inferred as either being unambiguously `A.b`, or being ambiguous between `A.b` and `B.b`, since `B` also implicitly converts to `int`.

Why would it infer `B.b` when `A` has been used in the literal but `B` hasn't? That's not how D's inference usually works at all.

> For case b you are correct. Arrays do not convert to their parent types even if their elements do.

What do you mean I'm correct? I didn't give you a concrete answer, because your question has no answer yet.

>This compiles:
> ```d
> enum C{ e,f,g,h }
> enum D:C{ i=C.f, j=C.g }
> auto c = [D.i, C.h];
> auto d = [C.e, D.j];
> ```
To `int[]`s, because the input is nonsense. I highly doubt that would even work, but again you will have to see into the future to learn how the implementation will affect atypical use-cases like this. As the DIP author, I simply don't see the positive value in demanding a specific implementation case for the example you gave. It's too ambiguous for anyone to agree how it should work.

Reviewer 3: > Why would it infer B.b when A has been used in the literal but B hasn't? That's not how D's inference usually works at all.

I don't think D sets any precedence. D usually infers types of individual elements without looking at other types, and only at the end decides a common element type for the array. The type of elements with ETI can only be decided after types other elements have been figured out, which is unlike anything in the current language. That's why it's not clear what would happen here.

> What do you mean I'm correct? I didn't give you a concrete answer, because your question has no answer yet.

I meant that since `[[A.a, A.b, A.c], [B.a, B.b, B.c]]` does not work (i thought it would), there is no reason why ETI should change that.

> I highly doubt that would even work, but again you will have to see into the future to learn how the implementation will affect atypical use-cases like this. As the DIP author, I simply don't see the positive value in demanding a specific implementation case for the example you gave. It's too ambiguous for anyone to agree how it should work.

It's exactly in atypical cases like this where language design errors will usually manifest. You don't know whether your idea has contradictions before you explore the more technical cases and nail the semantics down. In fact, that's why the DIPs are reviewed 3+ times in the first place.

Author: The bottom line is that the DIP already states that ambiguous ETI should be illegal. If you would like to propose that I change this, please tell me at least a rough idea of what you expect that to look like.
If you do not want this changed, then what you’re talking about is illegal syntax. I don’t really think we need to ponder which type of error the compiler will give us, I have no idea. If for some reason the implementation allows it, it will probably produce code that isn’t necessarily consistent between compilers, but that’s out of my hands as I am not implementing this feature—this is a DIP.

If you would like to discuss this matter further, please provide some insight into what you actually want out of this conversation, as I feel that it’s leading to nowhere. If you don’t actually want anything changed or revised, I can’t help you and I don’t really see the point in discussing this anymore.

Reviewer 3: > The bottom line is that the DIP already states that ambiguous ETI should be illegal.

Yes, it's perfectly fine if the DIP says that the code we're discussing is ambiguous and should be rejected. As long as the DIP does not leave the implementer guessing whether the compiler should accept or reject a piece of code. You can give my code snippets as examples of code rejected as ambiguous in the "other considerations" section.

However, there are many everyday cases where using `with` statements would prove insufficient, or outright silly.
For example, given the following delcarations:
```d
enum Size{ small, medium, large }
enum Shape{ square, round, triangular }
enum State{ on, off, undefined }

struct Obj{
    Size  size;
    Shape shape;
    State state;
    
    void myFn(Size size, Shape shape, State state){};
}
```
Let's create a `main` that doesn't use ETI or `with` statements:
```d
void main(){
    Obj myObj = {
        size:  Size.large,
        shape: Shape.round,
        state: State.on,
    };
    myObj.myFn(Size.medium, Shape.square, State.undefined);
}
```
Next, here's a version using ETI:
```d
void main(){
    Obj myObj = {
        size:  $large,
        shape: $round,
        state: $on,
    };
    myObj.myFn($medium, $square, $undefined);
}
```
And finally, here's a version rewritten to use `with` statements:
```d
void main(){
    Obj myObj;
    with(myObj){
        with(Size)  size  = large;
        with(Shape) shape = round;
        with(State) state = on;
        with(Size){
            myFn(medium, Shape.square, State.undefined);
        }
    }

> }

Reviewer 3: `with` statemets can do better than that:
```D
void main()
{   Obj myObj;
    with(myObj) with(Size) with(Shape) with(State){
        size  = large;
        shape = round;
        state = on;

        myFn(medium, square, undefined);
    }
}
```

Now granted, a style checking tool (or a human style police of a rigid sort) might not accept that. But I argue that's a problem of the style, not of the language.

Author: That's cursed, but also even less readable than my original example. What's large? Is it a variable, a function, a field or member of myObj, a member of Size, a member of Shape, a member of State... etc. Too many things in scope, brain melted!

Author: P.S. yeah I'll update the example to match that
